# Neptune Core Overview
Neptune Core is a multi-threaded program using the tokio framework for concurrent primitives. It connects to other clients through TCP/IP and accepts calls to its RPC server through HTTP/JSON.

## Threads
There are four classes of threads:
- main: handles init and `main_loop`
- peer[]: handles `connect_to_peers` and `peer_loop`
- rpc[]: handles `rpc_server` for incoming RPC requests
- mining: runs `miner_loop`

## Channels
The threads can communicate with each other through channels provided by the tokio framework. All communication goes throuh the main thread. There is e.g. no way for the miner to communicate with peer threads.

The channels are:
- peer to main: `mpsc`, "multiple producer, single consumer".
- main to peer: `broadcast`, messages can only be sent to *all* peer threads. If you only want one peer thread to act, the message must include an IP that represents the peer for which the action is intended.

## Global State
All threads have access to the global state and they can all read from it. Each type of thread can have its own local state that is not shared across thread, this is **not** what is discussed here.

The global state has three fields and they each follow some rules:
- `cli` CLI arguments. The state carriest around the CLI arguments. These are read-only.
- `chain` Blockchain state. Consists of `lightState`, ephemereal, and `achivalState`, persistent. Only `main` thread may write to this. Archival state is stored both in a database and on disk.
- `network`, network state. Consists of `peer_map` for storing in memory info about all connected peers and `peer_databases` for storing info about banned peers. Both of these can be written to by main or by peer threads. `network` also contains a `syncing` value (only `main` may write) and `instance_id` which is read-only.

## Functionalities
- Peer discovery, state is managed by `main`
- Synchronization, state is managed by `main`

## Design Philosophies
- Avoid state through instruction pointer. This means that a request/response exchange should be handled without nesting of e.g matched messages from another peer. So when a peer thread requests a block from another peer it must return to the instruction pointer where it can receive *any* message from the peer and not only work if it actually gets the block as the next message. The reasoning behind this is that a peer thread must be able to respond to e.g. a peer discovery request message from the same peer before that peer responds with the requested block.

## Central Primitives
From `tokio`
- `spawn`
- `select!`
- `tokio::sync::Mutex`

From Std lib:
- `Arc`

## Persistent Memory
We use `rusty-leveldb` for our database layer with a custom-wrapper that makes it more type safe. `rusty-leveldb` allows for atomic writes within *one* database which is equivalent to a table in SQL lingo. So if you want atomic writes across multiple datatypes (you do want this!) you need to put that `enum` into the database and then cast the output type to the correct type. I think this is a low price to pay to achieve atomicity on the DB-layer.

Blocks are stored on disk and their position on disk is stored in the `block_index` database. Blocks are read from and written to disk using `mmap`.

## Challenges
- Deadlocks. Solution: always acquire locks in the same order. Note though that locks from `std::sync` may not be held over an `await`. The linter should tell you if you do this.
- We also have a few race conditions in the code base but we should be able to find these by running `run-multiple-instances-advanced.sh` that spins up eight nodes that eventually form a complete graph through peer discovery.

